README.md, before:

# Insect Detect - DIY camera trap for automated insect monitoring

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/maxsitt/insect-detect-docs/main/docs/assets/logo.png" width="540">

[![DOI PLOS ONE](https://img.shields.io/badge/PLOS%20ONE-10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0295474-BD3094)](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0295474)
[![License: GPL v3](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-GPLv3-blue.svg)](https://choosealicense.com/licenses/gpl-3.0/)
[![DOI Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/badge/580886977.svg)](https://zenodo.org/badge/latestdoi/580886977)

This repository contains Python scripts and [YOLOv5](https://github.com/ultralytics/yolov5),
[YOLOv6](https://github.com/meituan/YOLOv6), [YOLOv7](https://github.com/WongKinYiu/yolov7)
and [YOLOv8](https://github.com/ultralytics/ultralytics) object detection models
([.blob format](https://docs.luxonis.com/software/ai-inference/conversion/)) for testing
and deploying the **Insect Detect** DIY camera trap for automated insect monitoring.

The camera trap system is composed of low-cost off-the-shelf hardware components
([Raspberry Pi Zero 2 W](https://www.raspberrypi.com/products/raspberry-pi-zero-2-w/),
[Luxonis OAK-1](https://docs.luxonis.com/hardware/products/OAK-1),
[Witty Pi 4 L3V7](https://www.uugear.com/product/witty-pi-4-l3v7/) or
[PiJuice Zero pHAT](https://uk.pi-supply.com/products/pijuice-zero)), combined with
open source software and can be easily assembled and set up with the
[provided instructions](https://maxsitt.github.io/insect-detect-docs/).

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/maxsitt/insect-detect-docs/main/docs/hardware/assets/images/2024_mount_camtrap_platform.jpg" width="400">

## Installation

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Please make sure that you followed [all steps](https://maxsitt.github.io/insect-detect-docs/software/pisetup/)
> to set up your Raspberry Pi.

Install all required dependencies for RPi + OAK:

``` bash
wget -qO- https://raw.githubusercontent.com/maxsitt/insect-detect/main/install_dependencies_oak.sh | sudo bash
```

Download the `insect-detect` GitHub repo:

``` bash
git clone https://github.com/maxsitt/insect-detect
```

Create a virtual environment with access to the system site-packages:

``` bash
python3 -m venv --system-site-packages env_insdet
```

Update pip in the virtual environment:

``` bash
env_insdet/bin/python3 -m pip install --upgrade pip
```

Install all required packages in the virtual environment:

``` bash
env_insdet/bin/python3 -m pip install -r insect-detect/requirements.txt
```

Run the scripts with the Python interpreter from the virtual environment:

``` bash
env_insdet/bin/python3 insect-detect/yolo_tracker_save_hqsync.py
```

Check out the [**Programming**](https://maxsitt.github.io/insect-detect-docs/software/programming/)
section for more details about the scripts and tips on possible software modifications.

---

## Detection models

| Model       | size<br><sup>(pixels) | mAP<sup>val<br>50-95 | mAP<sup>val<br>50 | Precision<sup>val<br> | Recall<sup>val<br> | Speed<sup>OAK<br>(fps) | params<br><sup>(M) |
| ----------- | --------------------- | -------------------- | ----------------- | --------------------- | ------------------ | ---------------------- | ------------------ |
| YOLOv5n     | 320                   | 53.8                 | 96.9              | 95.5                  | 96.1               | 49                     | 1.76               |
| YOLOv6n     | 320                   | 50.3                 | 95.1              | 96.9                  | 89.8               | 60                     | 4.63               |
| YOLOv7-tiny | 320                   | 53.2                 | 95.7              | 94.7                  | 94.2               | 52                     | 6.01               |
| YOLOv8n     | 320                   | 55.4                 | 94.4              | 92.2                  | 89.9               | 39                     | 3.01               |

<details>
<summary>Table Notes</summary>

- All models were trained to 300 epochs with batch size 32 and default hyperparameters. Reproduce the
  model training with the provided [Google Colab notebooks](https://github.com/maxsitt/insect-detect-ml#model-training).
- Trained on [Insect_Detect_detection](https://universe.roboflow.com/maximilian-sittinger/insect_detect_detection)
  dataset [version 7](https://universe.roboflow.com/maximilian-sittinger/insect_detect_detection/dataset/7),
  downscaled to 320x320 pixel with only 1 class ("insect").
- Model metrics (mAP, Precision, Recall) are shown for the original PyTorch (.pt) model before conversion to ONNX ->
  OpenVINO -> .blob format. Reproduce metrics by using the respective model validation method.
- Speed (fps) is shown for the converted models (.blob 4 shaves), running on OAK-1 connected to RPi Zero 2 W (~2 fps slower
  with object tracker). Set `cam_rgb.setFps()` to the respective fps shown for each model to reproduce the speed measurements.
- While connected via SSH (X11 forwarding of the frames), print fps to the console and comment out `cv2.imshow()`,
  as forwarding the frames will slow down the received message output and thereby fps. If you are using
  a Raspberry Pi 4 B connected to a screen, fps will be correctly shown in the livestream (see gif).

</details>

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/maxsitt/insect-detect-docs/main/docs/assets/images/yolov5n_tracker_episyrphus_320.gif" width="320">

---

## Processing pipeline

> [!NOTE]
> The new version of the processing pipeline (November 2024) differs to the descriptions in the
> PLOS ONE paper and on the documentation website (will be updated soon). Please refer to the
> following points for an up-to-date description.

Processing pipeline for the
[`yolo_tracker_save_hqsync.py`](https://github.com/maxsitt/insect-detect/blob/main/yolo_tracker_save_hqsync.py)
script that can be used for automated insect monitoring:

- A custom **YOLO insect detection model** is run in real time on device (OAK) and uses a
  continuous stream of downscaled LQ frames (default: 320x320 px) as input
- An **object tracker** uses the bounding box coordinates of detected insects to assign a unique
  tracking ID to each individual present in the frame and track its movement through time
- The object tracker (+ model) output from inference on LQ frames is synchronized with
  **MJPEG-encoded HQ frames** (default: 3840x2160 px) on device (OAK) using the respective timestamps
- The encoded HQ frames are saved to the Raspberry Pi's SD card at the specified **capture interval**
  (default: 1 second) if an insect is detected and tracked and independent of detections at the
  specified timelapse interval (default: 10 minutes)
- Corresponding **metadata** from the detection model and tracker output (including timestamp, label,
  confidence score, tracking ID, tracking status and bounding box coordinates) is saved to a
  metadata .csv file for each detected and tracked insect at the specified capture interval
- The metadata can be used to **crop detected insects** from the HQ frames and save them as individual
  .jpg images and/or save a copy of the frame with overlays. Depending on the post-processing settings,
  the original HQ frames will be optionally deleted after the processing to save storage space
- During the recording, a maximum pipeline speed of **~19 FPS** for 4K resolution (3840x2160) and
  **~42 FPS** for 1080p resolution (1920x1080) can be reached if the capture interval is set to 0
  and the camera frame rate is adjusted accordingly
- With default settings, the new pipeline consumes **~3.8 W** during recording (previous version: ~4.4 W)

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/maxsitt/insect-detect-docs/main/docs/deployment/assets/images/hq_sync_pipeline.png" width="800">

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/maxsitt/insect-detect-docs/main/docs/deployment/assets/images/hq_frame_sync_1080p.jpg" width="800">

More information about the processing pipeline can be found in the
[**Insect Detect Docs**](https://maxsitt.github.io/insect-detect-docs/deployment/detection/) 📑.

Check out the [classification](https://maxsitt.github.io/insect-detect-docs/deployment/classification/)
instructions and the [`insect-detect-ml`](https://github.com/maxsitt/insect-detect-ml) GitHub repo for
information on how to classify the cropped detections with the provided classification model and script.

Take a look at the [post-processing](https://maxsitt.github.io/insect-detect-docs/deployment/post-processing/)
instructions for information on how to post-process the metadata with classification results.

---

## License

This repository is licensed under the terms of the GNU General Public License v3.0
([GNU GPLv3](https://choosealicense.com/licenses/gpl-3.0/)).

## Citation

If you use resources from this repository, please cite our paper:

```
Sittinger M, Uhler J, Pink M, Herz A (2024) Insect detect: An open-source DIY camera trap for automated insect monitoring. PLOS ONE 19(4): e0295474. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0295474
```

Commit message:

Add YAML config support
Use YAML config file to set all relevant configuration parameters. Save configuration and model parameters of each recording session as JSON files. Unify the main script for automated recording to support either no powermanager, or Witty Pi 4 L3V7, or PiJuice Zero. Improve data archiving and upload, including setting the content that should be uploaded (e.g. only crops or only metadata). Improve logging behaviour and messages.

README.md, after:

# Insect Detect - DIY camera trap for automated insect monitoring

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/maxsitt/insect-detect-docs/main/docs/assets/logo.png" width="540">

[![DOI PLOS ONE](https://img.shields.io/badge/PLOS%20ONE-10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0295474-BD3094)](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0295474)
[![License: GPL v3](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-GPLv3-blue.svg)](https://choosealicense.com/licenses/gpl-3.0/)
[![DOI Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/badge/580886977.svg)](https://zenodo.org/badge/latestdoi/580886977)

This repository contains Python scripts and [YOLOv5](https://github.com/ultralytics/yolov5),
[YOLOv6](https://github.com/meituan/YOLOv6), [YOLOv7](https://github.com/WongKinYiu/yolov7)
and [YOLOv8](https://github.com/ultralytics/ultralytics) object detection models
([.blob format](https://docs.luxonis.com/software/ai-inference/conversion/)) for testing
and deploying the **Insect Detect** DIY camera trap for automated insect monitoring.

The camera trap system is composed of low-cost off-the-shelf hardware components
([Raspberry Pi Zero 2 W](https://www.raspberrypi.com/products/raspberry-pi-zero-2-w/),
[Luxonis OAK-1](https://docs.luxonis.com/hardware/products/OAK-1),
[Witty Pi 4 L3V7](https://www.uugear.com/product/witty-pi-4-l3v7/) or
[PiJuice Zero pHAT](https://uk.pi-supply.com/products/pijuice-zero)), combined with
open source software and can be easily assembled and set up with the
[provided instructions](https://maxsitt.github.io/insect-detect-docs/).

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/maxsitt/insect-detect-docs/main/docs/hardware/assets/images/2024_mount_camtrap_platform.jpg" width="400">

## Installation

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Please make sure that you followed [all steps](https://maxsitt.github.io/insect-detect-docs/software/pisetup/)
> to set up your Raspberry Pi.

Install all required dependencies for RPi + OAK:

``` bash
wget -qO- https://raw.githubusercontent.com/maxsitt/insect-detect/main/install_dependencies_oak.sh | sudo bash
```

Install and configure [Rclone](https://rclone.org/docs/) if you want to use the upload feature:

``` bash
wget -qO- https://rclone.org/install.sh | sudo bash
```

Download the `insect-detect` GitHub repo:

``` bash
git clone https://github.com/maxsitt/insect-detect
```

Create a virtual environment with access to the system site-packages:

``` bash
python3 -m venv --system-site-packages env_insdet
```

Update pip in the virtual environment:

``` bash
env_insdet/bin/python3 -m pip install --upgrade pip
```

Install all required packages in the virtual environment:

``` bash
env_insdet/bin/python3 -m pip install -r insect-detect/requirements.txt
```

Run the scripts with the Python interpreter from the virtual environment:

``` bash
env_insdet/bin/python3 insect-detect/yolo_tracker_save_hqsync.py
```

Check out the [**Programming**](https://maxsitt.github.io/insect-detect-docs/software/programming/)
section for more details about the scripts and tips on possible software modifications.

---

## Detection models

| Model       | size<br><sup>(pixels) | mAP<sup>val<br>50-95 | mAP<sup>val<br>50 | Precision<sup>val<br> | Recall<sup>val<br> | Speed<sup>OAK<br>(fps) | params<br><sup>(M) |
| ----------- | --------------------- | -------------------- | ----------------- | --------------------- | ------------------ | ---------------------- | ------------------ |
| YOLOv5n     | 320                   | 53.8                 | 96.9              | 95.5                  | 96.1               | 49                     | 1.76               |
| YOLOv6n     | 320                   | 50.3                 | 95.1              | 96.9                  | 89.8               | 60                     | 4.63               |
| YOLOv7-tiny | 320                   | 53.2                 | 95.7              | 94.7                  | 94.2               | 52                     | 6.01               |
| YOLOv8n     | 320                   | 55.4                 | 94.4              | 92.2                  | 89.9               | 39                     | 3.01               |

<details>
<summary>Table Notes</summary>

- All models were trained to 300 epochs with batch size 32 and default hyperparameters. Reproduce the
  model training with the provided [Google Colab notebooks](https://github.com/maxsitt/insect-detect-ml#model-training).
- Trained on [Insect_Detect_detection](https://universe.roboflow.com/maximilian-sittinger/insect_detect_detection)
  dataset [version 7](https://universe.roboflow.com/maximilian-sittinger/insect_detect_detection/dataset/7),
  downscaled to 320x320 pixel with only 1 class ("insect").
- Model metrics (mAP, Precision, Recall) are shown for the original PyTorch (.pt) model before conversion to ONNX ->
  OpenVINO -> .blob format. Reproduce metrics by using the respective model validation method.
- Speed (fps) is shown for the converted models (.blob 4 shaves), running on OAK-1 connected to RPi Zero 2 W (~2 fps slower
  with object tracker). Set `cam_rgb.setFps()` to the respective fps shown for each model to reproduce the speed measurements.
- While connected via SSH (X11 forwarding of the frames), print fps to the console and comment out `cv2.imshow()`,
  as forwarding the frames will slow down the received message output and thereby fps. If you are using
  a Raspberry Pi 4 B connected to a screen, fps will be correctly shown in the livestream (see gif).

</details>

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/maxsitt/insect-detect-docs/main/docs/assets/images/yolov5n_tracker_episyrphus_320.gif" width="320">

---

## Processing pipeline

> [!NOTE]
> The latest version of the processing pipeline (November 2024) differs to the descriptions
> in the PLOS ONE paper and on the documentation website. Please refer to the following
> points for an up-to-date description.

All relevant configuration parameters can be modified in the
[`configs/config_custom.yaml`](https://github.com/maxsitt/insect-detect/tree/main/configs/config_default.yaml) file.

Processing pipeline for the
[`yolo_tracker_save_hqsync.py`](https://github.com/maxsitt/insect-detect/blob/main/yolo_tracker_save_hqsync.py)
script that can be used for automated insect monitoring:

- A custom **YOLO insect detection model** is run in real time on device (OAK) and uses a
  continuous stream of downscaled LQ frames as input (default: 320x320 px at 20 fps).
- An **object tracker** uses the bounding box coordinates of detected insects to assign a unique
  tracking ID to each individual present in the frame and track its movement through time.
- The tracker + model output from inference on LQ frames is synchronized with
  **MJPEG-encoded HQ frames** (default: 3840x2160 px) on device (OAK) using the respective timestamps.
- The encoded HQ frames are saved to the microSD card at the configured intervals if
  an insect is detected (default: 1 s) and independent of detections (default: 10 min).
- Corresponding **metadata** from the detection model and tracker output (including timestamp, label,
  confidence score, tracking ID, tracking status and bounding box coordinates) is saved to a
  metadata .csv file for each detected and tracked insect at the configured interval.
- The metadata can be used to **crop detected insects** from the HQ frames and save them as individual
  .jpg images. Depending on the post-processing configuration, the original HQ frames will be optionally deleted after the processing to save storage space.
- During the recording, a maximum pipeline speed of **~19 FPS** for 4K resolution (3840x2160) and
  **~42 FPS** for 1080p resolution (1920x1080) can be reached if the capture interval is set to 0
  and the camera frame rate is adjusted accordingly.
- With the default configuration, the recording pipeline consumes **~3.8 W** of power.
- If a power management board (Witty Pi 4 L3V7 or PiJuice Zero) is connected and enabled in the
  configuration, intelligent power management is activated which includes battery charge level
  monitoring and conditional recording durations.

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/maxsitt/insect-detect-docs/main/docs/deployment/assets/images/hq_sync_pipeline.png" width="800">

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/maxsitt/insect-detect-docs/main/docs/deployment/assets/images/hq_frame_sync_1080p.jpg" width="800">

More information about the processing pipeline can be found in the
[**Insect Detect Docs**](https://maxsitt.github.io/insect-detect-docs/deployment/detection/) 📑.

Check out the [classification](https://maxsitt.github.io/insect-detect-docs/deployment/classification/)
instructions and the [`insect-detect-ml`](https://github.com/maxsitt/insect-detect-ml) GitHub repo for
information on how to classify the cropped detections with the provided classification model and script.

Take a look at the [post-processing](https://maxsitt.github.io/insect-detect-docs/deployment/post-processing/)
instructions for information on how to post-process the metadata with classification results.

---

## License

This repository is licensed under the terms of the GNU General Public License v3.0
([GNU GPLv3](https://choosealicense.com/licenses/gpl-3.0/)).

## Citation

If you use resources from this repository, please cite our paper:

```
Sittinger M, Uhler J, Pink M, Herz A (2024) Insect detect: An open-source DIY camera trap for automated insect monitoring. PLOS ONE 19(4): e0295474. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0295474
```
